docs: :memo: major rewrite of the naming scheme to match frictionless (#546)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/design/naming.qmd

{{< include /docs/includes/_wip.qmd >}}

> This document describes a general naming scheme style for Sprout that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes a general naming scheme for Sprout that
```
Maybe "scheme" is enough?

is guided by our [style guide](https://design.seedcase-project.org/style/)
as well as by the [Frictionless
Framework](https://v4.framework.frictionlessdata.io/) and [Data
Package](https://datapackage.org/) structure. This naming scheme *only*

> applies to file paths, data objects, functions, URLs, API endpoints, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
applies to data objects, functions, URLs, API endpoints, and
```

command line interfaces that are exposed to or associated with
user-facing content. It does *not* apply to internal content; see the
style guide for details on naming internal (developer-facing) content.

We'll compose names based on the objects we and our users interact with
as well as the actions taken on those objects. Following along with the

> Data Package terminology, we simplify "data package" to "package" and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Data Package](https://datapackage.org/) terminology, we simplify "data package" to "package" and
```

> "data resource" to "resource". We use words "property" or "properties"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"data resource" to "resource". We use the words "property" or "properties"
```

to describe package and resource metadata contained

> in the `datapackage.json` file that follows the Frictionless Data

Reviewer 2: Add link to Frictionless Data?

Author: Included the word Frictionless to the data package above.

> to describe the metadata about the package or resource that is contained
> within the `datapackage.json` file that follows the Frictionless Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to describe package and resource metadata contained
in the `datapackage.json` file that follows the Frictionless Data
```
Just avoiding an extra that-clause

specification.

## Objects

| Object | Description |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| package(s) | A data package that contains a collection of related data resources and properties. |

> | resource(s) | A single data file within a package, along with its properties. |

Reviewer 2: Technically it can be thought of as a single data file (the parquet) or multiple data files (the raw file(s)), right?

Author: Umm, not sure what you mean about the second part, since you suggested adding the properties word here.

> | resource(s) | A single data file within a package, along with its properties. |

Author: ```suggestion
| resource(s) | A single data file within a package, along with its properties and associated *raw* data files. |
```

> | resource(s) | A single data file within a package. |

Reviewer: Would the (resource) properties be considered part of the resource here?

> | resource(s) | A single data file within a package. |

Author: ```suggestion
| resource(s) | A single data file within a package, along with its properties. |
```

| properties or property | Metadata about a package or resource. |
| file structure or structure | The file and folder structure of a package. |
| path | A file path listing the location of folders or files that Sprout interacts with. |

> | template | A template file for specific objects, such as a template properties file. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| template | A template file for specific objects, such as a template for a package or resource properties file. |
```

> | data | The data file within a resource. |

Reviewer 2: Meaning raw or db or parquet? Or all three? :)

> | data | The data file within a resource. |

Author: ```suggestion
| data | The data file within a resource. Within Sprout, this includes the table in the database, the Parquet file, as well as raw files. |
```

| identifier | A unique identifier for a package or resource, denoted as `id`. |

: General objects used throughout Sprout.

| File or folder | Description |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| packages | The folder that contains all packages. |
| resources | The folder that contains all resource files in a package. |
| raw | The folder that contains raw data files for a data resource. |
| raw data file | A compressed raw data file format, such as a `.zip`, `.gzip`, or `.tar.gz` file. |

> | JSON | The main way we save and pass information around. |

Reviewer 2: Does this only include properties or also other information?

> | JSON | The main way we save and pass information around. |

Author: ```suggestion
| JSON | The main way we save and pass information around on the package's or resource's properties. |
```

> | JSON | The main way we pass and save information around. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| JSON | The main way we save and pass information around. |
```
Reads better this way but conceptually the other way around is more accurate.

> | Parquet | A columnar, efficient storage file format that we use to save a data resource. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Parquet | A columnar, efficient storage file format that we use to save data within a resource. |
```

| SQLite | A relational database file format that we use to contain all data resources in a package. |

: Specific files and folders used within or output by Sprout.

## Actions

| Action | Description |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| create | Create a new object. |
| construct | Construct or reconstruct a data file (like the Parquet file). |
| view | View details about an object. |
| list | List basic details about many objects. |
| edit | Edit an object, specifically the properties object. |
| add | Add another object to an existing object, specifically adding data to a resource. |
| write | Write an object to a file. |

> | copy | Copy a file from on location to another. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| copy | Copy a file from one location to another. |
```

{{< include /docs/includes/_wip.qmd >}}

The naming scheme for Sprout is guided by our [style
guide](https://design.seedcase-project.org/style/) as well as by the the
[Frictionless Framework](https://v4.framework.frictionlessdata.io/) and
[Data Package](https://datapackage.org/) structure. The below naming
scheme *only* applies to file paths, data objects, functions, URLs, API
endpoints, and command line interfaces that are exposed to or associated
with user-facing content. It does *not* apply to internal content; see
the style guide for details on naming internal (developer-facing)
content.

## Code-based actions and objects

We'll compose names based on the objects we and our users interact with
as well as the actions taken on those objects. Following along with the
Data Package terminology, we simplify "data package" to "package" and
"data resource" to "resource".

-   Types of core objects: packages, resources, properties (data package metadata), and data.
-   Types of actions taken on those objects: create, view, edit (a

>     file), add (data in the package), list, and delete.

Reviewer 2: Ah, yes, I see! Just thought that it would be clearer to use the same actions for functions and URLs. But I see your point 👍

-   Types of identifiers for specific items of objects (as numbers):
    packages and resources.

> ### Functions

Author: I realize from the comments and also looking through both PRs that this doc is deviating from simply a naming scheme and more into a design. So I think I will split it up into two new PRs that describe the core functionality in one and the app URLs/pages in another.

> ### Functions

Reviewer 2: Sounds amazing 🎉

Based on the above principles and our style guide, we have defined the
following naming scheme for functions. Several of the functions have a potentially optional argument called `properties`, which is a list of key-value pairs that describe the package, as per the Data Package specification.

`packages_list()`

:   List basic details of all packages.

`package_view(package_id)`

:   View details of a package.

`package_create(properties)`

:   Create the folder and file structure for a new package, as well as
    the overall properties metadata that describes the package. 

`package_edit(package_id, properties)`

:   Edit the properties metadata of the specific package.

`package_delete(package_id)`

:   Delete a specific package.

> `package_resources_list(package_id)`

Author: Yes, that's intentional. Listing is many. But the way the URLs are structured, it implies many, unless a specific ID is given.

:   List all the resources of a specific package.

`package_resource_view(package_id, resource_id)`

:   View the details of a package's specific resource.

`package_resource_create(package_id, data, properties)`

:   Create a new resource in a specific package using data and the properties metadata.

`package_resource_add(package_id, resource_id, data)`

> :   Add more data to a resource of a specific package.

Author: No. But I'll try to expand on this in another PR, based on my comment above.

> :   Add more data to a resource of a specific package.

Reviewer 2: Amazing, thanks! As I understand it, from your comments in the two current PRs, we'll have multiple raw files per resource but only one parquet?

> :   Add more data to a resource of a specific package.

Author: See #553 to maybe answer your question ☺️

`package_resource_edit(package_id, resource_id, properties)`

:   Edit the properties metadata of a specific resource of a specific package.

`package_resource_delete(package_id, resource_id)`

:   Delete all associated data and properties metadata of a specific resource of a specific package.

### App page URLs

> For the URL/app pages naming scheme, they follow a similar style to the

Author: I'll split these out into other docs, so they are more of an explanation of the design, rather than a naming scheme.

functions above, with some small differences:

-   When a naming scheme ends without an action, the default action is
    `view`.
-   Database and resource file objects do not have any `view` action, as

>     we want to limit access viewing data in the raw files and database.

Author: Yup! And it is also out of scope of Sprout.

>     we want to limit access viewing data in the raw files and database.

Author: If we provide the option to view data, we increase the risk that someone else can get the data. We have to think about more things, more security aspects, about permissions, about how they are given, about documentation to inform the user that data contributors can see the data too. So I'd rather avoid that and instead create better reporting summaries aimed at the admin. At the end of the day, the admin user will always be able to see the data anyway, so this isn't super important for us to spend so much time on.

>     we want to limit access viewing data in the raw files and database.

Reviewer 2: Alright. Thanks for elaborating!

Following these principles, the URLs would be:

`packages`

:   View all packages within the server or found by the app.

`packages/create`

:   Create and setup a new package, with basic properties metadata about the package but without any resources inside.

`packages/<id>`

:   View the landing page of a specific package.

`packages/<id>/edit`

:   Edit the properties metadata of a specific package.

`packages/<id>/delete`

:   Delete a specific package.

`packages/<id>/resources`

:   View basic details of all resources of a specific package.

`packages/<id>/resources/create`

:   Create a new resource with associated data and properties metadata in a specific
    package.

`packages/<id>/resources/<id>`

:   View the details of a specific resource in a specific
    package as a landing page.

> `packages/<id>/resources/<id>/edit`

Author: No, if they need to edit something, they can always re-upload the same person's IDs with the updated data values and it will update in the database.

> `packages/<id>/resources/<id>/edit`

Reviewer 2: Ohhh, what if they have a dataset with multiple data files for the same individual then?

> `packages/<id>/resources/<id>/edit`

Author: I'm not sure I understand what you mean? Maybe you can ask the question over in the #554 PR about the outputs, and maybe give an example of what you mean.

:   Edit the properties metadata of a specific resource of a specific package.

> `packages/<id>/resources/<id>/add`

Reviewer 2: So how we differentiate between what we before called data and metadata isn't necessary anymore in the urls since it's only about data when we `add` and otherwise it's about the metadata?

Author: I'm not sure I understand. What do we need to differentiate on?

> :   Add data to a specific resource of a specific package.

Author: I think we provide the full spec, give defaults if the user doesn't give them. There is no need for the user to dive into the frictionless spec or add additional fields that aren't standard (or ones that we might add to). Limit the choices the user has to make, so we can guide them toward an easier and smoother experience with structuring data.

> :   Add data to a specific resource of a specific package.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. Thanks for elaborating 💪

> will be stored in the Postgres database as the below file path and can

Author: Ah, I see I missed updating some things, thanks for the catch!

> be exported into actual files if desired.

Author: I need to update this paragraph, I had missed it.

The types of files and folders that make up the package are:

-   Types of files: JSON, Parquet, SQLite, compressed raw data (if
    appropriate).

> -   Types of folders: raw and resources.

Reviewer 2: But maybe Django has a way to handle this?

> -   Types of folders: raw and resources.

Author: I will clarify this, the function names are for core, not the app. The app will likely store everything in a Postgres database.

-   Types of identifiers for specific items of objects (as numbers):
    packages and resources.

Following a similar pattern described in the actions and objects section
above, the base folders are:

-   `packages/<id>/`: The related set of data specific to, for instance,
    one data collection study.
-   `resources/<id>/`: The files related to a specific table or file.
-   `ROOT`: The default location that packages are stored in. If on a
    server, would be the path to that server space given to Sprout. If
    on a local computer, would be a default path provided by Sprout for
    the specific operating system.

The naming scheme would then be:

`ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/raw/<timestamp>-<uuid>.<extension>.gzip`

> :   Compress all raw data files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:   Compressed raw data files associated with a specific resource.
```
"Compress" makes it sound like an action and not a path :)

> `ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/data.parquet`

Reviewer 2: Will the file(s) actually be called "data" or is it a placeholder like <id>? Bc there might be multiple files associated with a resource, right? Or will the addition of a data file (a raw) be added to the one parquet file?
If a placeholder, should we then add `<>` around data?
```suggestion
`ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/<data>.parquet`
```

Author: It is not a placeholder. Each data resource will only have one data table. But there will be potentially many raw data files, which will be merged into one Parquet table. The name `data` is arbitrary, it could be anything, but let's just keep it simple 😛

:   For tabular type data, it would likely be stored as a Parquet file
    to act as a backup to the database and to act as a faster file
    format for potential uses in analytics.

> `ROOT/packages/<id>/database.sqlite`

Reviewer 2: Same as above. Will it actually be called "database"? If we only have one db per project this is probably fine?

Author: That's right! Only one database per package.
